
# **World English Institute**

**INTRODUCTION TO THE NOUN**

`WORLD ENGLISH INSTITUTE`
`Uorld In-glish Ins-ti-tiut` **(Instituto Mundial de Inglés)**

`IN-TRO-DAC-SHON TU DE NAUN`
`In-tro-dak-shon tu de naun` **(Introducción al sustantivo)**

**In the Introductory Lesson, we learned that all English words can be divided into eight "parts of speech": nouns, pronouns, adjectives, verbs, adverbs, prepositions, conjunctions, and interjections.**

`In de In-tro-dac-to-ri Le-son,` `ui lernd dat ol In-glish words` `can bi di-vai-ded in-tu eit` `"parts ov spich":` `nauns, pro-nauns, a-dyec-tivs,` `verbs, ad-verbs, pre-po-si-shons,` `con-yanc-shons, and in-ter-yec-shons.`

**Review the Introductory Lesson until you are able to list the eight parts of speech and explain each one. In this lesson, we begin our study of the noun. We will learn to recognize and to use different kinds of nouns: proper, common, collective, concrete, abstract, specific, and non-specific. Don't be afraid of these words. You will understand their meaning by the time you finish this lesson.**

`Ri-viu de In-tro-dac-to-ri Le-son` `an-til iu ar ei-bol` `tu list de eit parts` `ov spich and eks-plein ich uan.` `In dis le-son, ui bi-guin` `aur sta-di ov de naun.` `Ui wil lern tu re-cog-naiz` `and tu ius di-fe-rent kainds` `ov nauns: pro-per, co-mon, co-lec-tiv,` `con-crit, abs-tract, spe-ci-fic, and non-spe-ci-fic.` `Dont bi a-freid ov dis words.` `Iu wil an-ders-tand der mi-ning` `bai de taim iu fi-nish dis le-son.`

**NOUNS TO LEARN**

`NAUNS TU LERN`
`Nauns tu lern` **(Sustantivos para aprender)**

**1. "cell" (noun) - the smallest structural unit in the body of a plant or animal.**
**Sentence: "An animal cell is so small that we cannot see one without a microscope."**

`Wan. "sel" (naun) - de smo-lest` `strak-chu-ral iu-nit in de bo-di` `ov a plant or a-ni-mal.`
`Sen-tens: "An a-ni-mal sel is` `so smol dat ui ca-not` `si uan wi-daut a mai-cros-coup."`

**2. "evidence" (noun) - the facts on which a judgment can be made.**
**Sentence: "Fossil records provide little or no evidence to support the theory of evolution."**

`Tu. "e-vi-dens" (naun) - de facts` `on uich a yadg-ment can` `bi meid.`
`Sen-tens: "Fo-sil re-cords pro-vaid` `li-tol or no e-vi-dens` `tu sa-port de thi-o-ri` `ov e-vo-liu-shon."`

**3. "handiwork" (noun) - the work that someone has done by hand.**
**Sentence: "When we look at a sunset or a rainbow, we see the handiwork of God."**

`Thri. "han-di-werk" (naun) - de werk` `dat sam-uan has dan` `bai hand.`
`Sen-tens: "Uen ui luk at` `a san-set or a rein-bou,` `ui si de han-di-werk` `ov God."`

**4. "mystery" (noun) - something that is unknown or unexplained.**
**Sentence: "There are many mysteries in nature that scientists have not been able to explain."**

`For. "mis-te-ri" (naun) - sam-thing` `dat is an-noun or an-eks-pleind.`
`Sen-tens: "Der ar me-ni mis-te-ris` `in nei-chur dat sai-en-tists` `hav not bin ei-bol` `tu eks-plein."`

**5. "personality" (noun) the qualities of being a person.**
**Sentence: "God has all the qualities of personality."**

`Faiv. "per-so-na-li-ti" (naun) de kuo-li-tis` `ov bi-ing a per-son.`
`Sen-tens: "God has ol` `de kua-li-tis ov per-so-na-li-ti."`

**6. "theory" (noun) - a system of conclusions based on reasoning.**
**Sentence: "A theory is something a person believes but is not able to prove.**

`Siks. "thi-o-ri" (naun) - a sis-tem` `ov con-clu-shons beist on ri-so-ning.`
`Sen-tens: "A thi-o-ri is sam-thing` `a per-son bi-livs bat` `is not ei-bol tu pruv."`

**7. "universe" (noun) - all things that exist, regarded as a whole.**
**Sentence: "No one knows how big the universe really is."**

`Se-ven. "iu-ni-vers" (naun) - ol things` `dat eg-sist, ri-gar-ded as` `a joul.`
`Sen-tens: "No uan nous` `jau big de iu-ni-vers` `ri-li is."`

**OTHER WORDS TO LEARN**

`A-DER WORDS TU LERN`
`A-der werds tu lern` **(Otras palabras para aprender)**

**1. "create" (verb) - to cause to exist.**
**Sentence: "In the beginning, God created the earth and sky."**

`Wan. "cri-eit" (verb) - tu caus` `tu eg-sist.`
`Sen-tens: "In de bi-gi-ning,` `God cri-ei-ted de erth` `and skai."`

**2. "design" (verb) to create a plan, sketch, or pattern.**
**Sentence: "Could any man have designed the human body?"**

`Tu. "di-sain" (verb) tu cri-eit` `a plan, sketch, or pa-tern.`
`Sen-tens: "Cud e-ni man` `hav di-saind de hiu-man` `bo-di?"`

**3. "evolve" (verb) - to develop slowly.**
**Sentence: "Some scientists believe that life on earth evolved spontaneously, without the help of God."**

`Thri. "i-volv" (verb) - tu di-ve-lop` `slou-li.`
`Sen-tens: "Sam sai-en-tists bi-liv` `dat laif on erth` `i-volvd spon-tei-ni-os-li, wi-daut` `de jelp ov God."`

**4. "generate" (infinitive) [a verb preceded by "to"] - to bring into existence.**
**Sentence: "Falling water is often used to generate electricity."**

`For. "ye-ne-reit" (in-fi-ni-tiv) [a verb` `pri-si-ded bai "tu"] - tu bring` `in-tu eg-sis-tens.`
`Sen-tens: "Fo-ling wo-ter is` `of-ten iust tu ye-ne-reit` `i-lec-tri-si-ti."`

**5. "reproductive" (adjective) - serving to reproduce or to bring forth again.**
**Sentence: "The acorn is part of the oak tree's reproductive system."**

`Faiv. "ri-pro-dak-tiv" (a-dyec-tiv) - ser-ving` `tu ri-pro-dius or tu bring` `forth a-gein.`
`Sen-tens: "De ei-corn is` `part ov de ouk tris` `ri-pro-dak-tiv sis-tem."`

**6. "spontaneously" (adverb) - without outside cause.**
**Sentence: "Oily rags sometimes burst into flames spontaneously."**

`Siks. "spon-tei-ni-os-li" (ad-verb) - wi-daut` `aut-said caus.`
`Sen-tens: "Oi-li rags sam-taims` `berst in-tu fleims spon-tei-ni-os-li."`

**WHAT IS A NOUN?**

`UAT IS A NAUN?`
`Uat is a naun?` **(¿Qué es un sustantivo?)**

**A noun is a word that names a person, place, or thing (object, animal, idea, action, quality, feeling, or event). The term "noun" means "name."**

`A naun is a werd` `dat neims a per-son, pleis,` `or thing (ob-yect, a-ni-mal,` `ai-di-a, ac-shon, kua-li-ti,` `fi-ling, or i-vent).` `De term "naun" mins "neim."`

**All people have names. You have a family name, a given name, and probably a middle name. What are your names? Write them down. Each of your names is a noun.**

`Ol pi-pol hav neims.` `Iu hav a fa-mi-li neim,` `a gi-ven neim, and pro-ba-bli` `a mi-dol neim. Uat ar` `iur neims? Rait dem daun.` `Ich ov iur neims` `is a naun.`

**You also have other names. You are a student, a teacher, a worker, a boy, girl, man, or woman. You are a brother, sister, son, daughter, mother, or father. These words are nouns. They are names given to people.**

`Iu ol-so hav a-der neims.` `Iu ar a stiu-dent, a ti-cher,` `a wer-ker, a boi, gerl,` `man, or wu-man. Iu ar` `a bra-der, sis-ter, son,` `do-ter, ma-der, or fa-der.` `Dis words ar nauns. Dei` `ar neims gi-ven tu pi-pol.`

**Places, too, have names. Where do you live? On what street or road? In what village, town, or city? In what county, state, province, or nation? By what river or lake? These words are nouns also. They are names of places.**

`Plei-ses, tu, hav neims.` `Uer du iu liv?` `On uat strit or roud?` `In uat vi-liy, taun,` `or si-ti? In uat caun-ti,` `steit, pro-vins, or nei-shon?` `Bai uat ri-ver or leik?` `Dis werds ar nauns ol-so.` `Dei ar neims ov plei-ses.`

**Things have names also. Look around you. Make a list of the things you see. The words that you write down are nouns. Make a list of things you ate for breakfast and lunch today. You have just made another list of nouns. Things like trees, grass, fish, and birds are nouns. So are qualities like wisdom, power, and truth. So are feelings such as fear, love, happiness, and joy, and events such as the creation, a meeting, a vacation, or a party. All these words are nouns. They are names of things.**

`Things hav neims ol-so.` `Luk a-raund iu.` `Meik a list ov de things` `iu si. De werds dat` `iu rait daun ar nauns.` `Meik a list ov things` `iu eit for brek-fast` `and lanch tu-dei. Iu hav` `yust meid a-na-der list` `ov nauns. Things laik tris,` `gras, fish, and berds` `ar nauns. So ar kua-li-tis` `laik wis-dom, pau-er, and truth.` `So ar fi-lings sach as` `fir, lov, ha-pi-nes, and yoi,` `and i-vents sach as` `de cri-ei-shon, a mi-ting,` `a va-kei-shon, or a par-ti.` `Ol dis werds ar nauns.` `Dei ar neims ov things.`

**Person	Place	Thing**
**child	school	desk**
**mother	nursery	diaper**
**president	company	profit**

`Per-son       Pleis       Thing`
`chaild       skul        desk`
`ma-der       ner-se-ri   dai-per` **(pañal)**
`pre-si-dent   cam-pa-ni   pro-fit`

**Sometimes a noun is a group of words.**
**Examples: "maid of honor," "justice of the peace," "Mount Hood," "seagull," "ice cream." Since these words must go together to make sense, each group of words is considered one noun. "Ice cream" is one noun.**

`Sam-taims a naun is` `a grup ov werds.`
`Eg-zam-pols: "meid ov o-nor,"` `"yas-tis ov de pis,"` `"Maunt Hud," "si-gal,"` `"ais crim." Sins dis werds` `mast go tu-ge-der tu` `meik sens, ich grup` `ov werds is con-si-derd` `uan naun. "Ais crim"` `is uan naun.`

**PROPER, COMMON, AND COLLECTIVE NOUNS**

`PRO-PER, CO-MON, AND CO-LEC-TIV NAUNS`
`Pro-per, co-mon, and co-lec-tiv nauns`

**A "proper noun" names a specific person, place, or thing and always begins with a capital letter. Examples: Adam, Tigris, Beijing, China, Monday, July, English. The first word in a sentence also starts with a capital letter.**

`A "pro-per naun" neims` `a spe-si-fic per-son, pleis,` `or thing and ol-weis` `bi-gins with a ca-pi-tal` `le-ter. Eg-zam-pols: A-dam,` `Tai-gris, Bei-ying, Chai-na,` `Man-dei, Yu-lai, In-glish.` `De ferst werd in` `a sen-tens ol-so starts` `with a ca-pi-tal le-ter.`

**Write the names of people in your family. These names are proper nouns. Examples: John, Eve.**

`Rait de neims ov` `pi-pol in iur fa-mi-li.` `Dis neims ar pro-per nauns.` `Eg-zam-pols: Yon, Iv.`

**Names of your street, city, state or province, and nation are proper nouns. Example: 15 Oak Street, Cole, Iowa 97030; U.S.A.**

`Neims ov iur strit,` `si-ti, steit or pro-vins,` `and nei-shon ar pro-per nauns.` `Eg-zam-pol: Fif-tin Ouk Strit,` `Coul, Ai-o-ua nain-ti-se-ven` `ou-thir-ti; Iu.Es.Ei.`

**Make a list of mountains, rivers, lakes, seas, or oceans in your area. Each of these words is a proper noun and should begin with a capital letter. Examples: Mount Everest, Nile River, Dead Sea.**

`Meik a list ov maun-tins,` `ri-vers, leiks, sis, or` `ou-shens in iur e-ri-a.` `Ich ov dis werds` `is a pro-per naun and` `shud bi-gin with a` `ca-pi-tal le-ter. Eg-zam-pols:` `Maunt E-ve-rest, Nail Ri-ver,` `Ded Si.`

**A "common noun" is a word that names any kind of person, place, or thing. Examples: man, woman, river, lake, city, country, day, month, language. A common noun never begins with a capital letter except at the beginning of a sentence or when used with a proper noun. The words "river" and "college" are common nouns, but when they are used to specify a certain river or college, they become proper nouns and are capitalized. Examples: Columbia River; Columbia Christian College. Whenever a common noun is used to set a person, place, or thing apart from others of the same class, it becomes a proper noun.**

`A "co-mon naun" is` `a werd dat neims` `e-ni kaind ov per-son,` `pleis, or thing. Eg-zam-pols:` `man, wu-man, ri-ver, leik,` `si-ti, can-tri, dei, manth,` `lan-guiy. A co-mon naun` `ne-ver bi-gins with a` `ca-pi-tal le-ter eks-sept at` `de bi-gi-ning ov a` `sen-tens or wen iust` `with a pro-per naun.` `De werds "ri-ver" and` `"co-liy" ar co-mon nauns,` `bat wen dei ar iust` `tu spe-si-fai a ser-ten` `ri-ver or co-liy, dei` `bi-cam pro-per nauns and` `ar ca-pi-ta-laist. Eg-zam-pols:` `Co-lam-bi-a Ri-ver; Co-lam-bi-a` `Kris-chan Co-liy. Ue-ne-ver` `a co-mon naun is iust` `tu set a per-son, pleis,` `or thing a-part from` `a-ders ov de seim` `clas, it bi-cams a` `pro-per naun.`

**A "collective noun" refers to a group of people or things that are bound together as a unit. A collective noun is singular in form but refers to more than one.**
**Examples: assembly, crew, fleet, flock, herd, jury, litter, swarm, school.**

`A "co-lec-tiv naun" ri-fers` `tu a grup ov pi-pol` `or things dat ar baund` `tu-ge-der as a iu-nit.` `A co-lec-tiv naun is` `sin-giu-lar in form` `bat ri-fers tu mor` `dan uan.`
`Eg-zam-pols: a-sem-bli, cru, flit,` `flok, herd, yu-ri, li-ter,` `sworm, skul.`

**Proper	Common	Collective**
**Joe Montana	quarterback	team**
**U.S.S. Missouri	battleship	fleet**
**Snoopy	dog	litter**
**Eve	woman	family**

`Pro-per       Co-mon       Co-lec-tiv`
`Yo Mon-ta-na  kuor-ter-bak  tim`
`Iu.Es.Es. Mi-zu-ri  ba-tol-ship  flit`
`Snu-pi        dog         li-ter`
`Iv            wu-man       fa-mi-li`

**CONCRETE AND ABSTRACT NOUNS**

`CON-CRIT AND ABS-TRACT NAUNS`
`Con-crit and abs-tract nauns` **(Sustantivos concretos y abstractos)**

**A "concrete noun" names a person, place, or thing that can be heard, seen, smelled, tasted, or touched.**
**Examples: owl, banana, cake, train, oil, pig, man.**
**We become aware of these persons and material objects through the physical senses.**

`A "con-crit naun" neims` `a per-son, pleis, or thing` `dat can bi herd, sin,` `smeld, teis-ted, or tacht.`
`Eg-zam-pols: aul, ba-na-na, keik,` `trein, oil, pig, man.`
`Ui bi-com a-uer ov` `dis per-sons and ma-ti-ri-al` `ob-yects thru de fi-si-cal` `sen-ses.`

**An "abstract noun" names a quality, feeling, or idea.**
**Examples: love, fear, intelligence, goodness.**
**These are general. They do not refer to a certain case or example or to a material object. We become aware of them through our thoughts and emotions.**

`An "abs-tract naun" neims` `a kua-li-ti, fi-ling, or` `ai-di-a.`
`Eg-zam-pols: lov, fir, in-te-li-yens,` `gud-nes.`
`Dis ar ye-ne-ral. Dei` `du not ri-fer tu` `a ser-ten keis or` `eg-zam-pol or tu a` `ma-ti-ri-al ob-yect. Ui bi-com` `a-uer ov dem thru` `aur thots and i-mo-shons.`

**Concrete Nouns	Abstract Nouns**
**horse	strength**
**swan	grace**
**flower	beauty**
**joke	humor**

`Con-crit Nauns      Abs-tract Nauns`
`hors               strength`
`swan               greis`
`flau-er            biu-ti`
`yok                hiu-mor`

**SPECIFIC AND NONSPECIFIC NOUNS**

`SPE-SI-FIC AND NON-SPE-SI-FIC NAUNS`
`Spe-si-fic and non-spe-si-fic nauns` **(Sustantivos específicos y no específicos)**

**A "specific noun" is a noun that names a certain class of persons or things.**
**A nonspecific noun is general in nature and does not specify a certain class of person or things.**

`A "spe-si-fic naun" is` `a naun dat neims` `a ser-ten clas ov` `per-sons or things.`
`A non-spe-si-fic naun is` `ye-ne-ral in nei-chur and` `das not spe-si-fai a` `ser-ten clas ov per-son` `or things.`

**Specific Nouns	Nonspecific Nouns**
**dog	animal**
**crow	bird**
**rose	flower**
**ant	insect**

`Spe-si-fic Nauns      Non-spe-si-fic Nauns`
`dog                  a-ni-mal`
`crou                 berd`
`rous                 flau-er`
`ant                  in-sect`

**Now answer the questions in this lesson; then go to Reading Assignment 1 and look for nouns. Notice how many nouns there are in the lesson and how important nouns are to the English language. Complete the questions, and Lessons 2 will be sent to you.**

`Nau an-ser de kues-chons` `in dis le-son; den` `go tu Ri-ding A-sain-ment` `Uan and luk for nauns.` `No-tis hau me-ni nauns` `der ar in de le-son` `and hau im-por-tant nauns` `ar tu de In-glish` `lan-guiy. Com-plit de kues-chons,` `and Le-sons Tu wil` `bi sent tu iu.`
