**The Noun (Continued)**

**`Da Noun (Con-tí-niud)`**

**Introduction**

**`In-tro-duk-shon`**

**In Lesson One,**

**`In Le-sun Wan,`**

**we learned to recognize and use different kinds of nouns:**

**`ui lurnd tu rek-uh-naiz and yius dif-rent kainds ov nouns:`**

**proper and common nouns, collective nouns, concrete and abstract nouns, and specific and non-specific nouns.**

**`prah-per and koh-mon nouns, koh-lek-tiv nouns, kon-kreet and ab-strakt nouns, and speh-sif-ik and non-speh-sif-ik nouns.`**

**In this lesson,**

**`In dis le-sun,`**

**we will learn about singular, plural, and possessive nouns.**

**`ui uil lurn abaut sing-yoo-ler, ploo-ral, and poh-zes-iv nouns.`**

**But first, let us learn some new words.**

**`Bat ferst, let as lurn som niu uerds.`**

**NOUNS TO LEARN**

**`NOUNS TU LURN`**

1. **"apostrophe" (noun)** --
    
    **`"wan. uh-pos-tro-fi" (noun)`**
    
    -- a punctuation mark (') used to show that something **belongs (pertenece)** to a person, place, or thing.
    
    - `- **a pun-ktoo-ey-shon mark (') yiusd tu shou dat som-ding be-longs tu a per-son, pleis, or ding.**`
    
    Sentence: "An apostrophe is also used to show that a letter has been **left out (eliminar u omitir)** of a word."
    
    **`Sen-tens: "An uh-pos-tro-fi iz ol-so yiusd tu shou dat a le-ter has bin left aut ov a uord."`**
    
    Example: cannot > can't.
    
    **`Ek-samp-ul: cannot > can't.`**
    
2. **"computer" (noun)** --
    
    **`"tu. com-piu-ter" (noun)`**
    
    -- an electronic machine that **performs (realiza)** high-speed mathematical calculations storing and processing information.
    
    - `- **an i-lek-tron-ik ma-shin dat per-formz hai-spid ma-thuh-ma-ti-cal kal-kue-lay-shonz stor-ing and pro-sess-ing in-for-mey-shon.**`
    
    Sentence: "Many people in America now have personal computers at home."
    
    **`Sen-tens: "Me-ni pi-pl in uh-mer-i-ka nau hav per-son-al com-piu-ters at jom."`**
    
3. **"consonant" (noun)** --
    
    **`"thri. kon-so-nent" (noun)`**
    
    -- any letter in the English alphabet except "a," "e," "i," "o," and "u."
    
    - `- **e-ni le-ter in di ing-glish al-fuh-bet ek-sept "ei," "i," "ai," "ou," and "iu."**`
    
    Sentence: "A consonant is a **sound of speech (sonido del habla)** produced by using the lips, teeth, **throat (garganta)**, or tongue to block the flow of air."
    
    **`Sen-tens: "A kon-so-nent iz a saund ov spich pro-diusd bai yiu-sing de lips, tit, troat, or tong tu blok de flou ov er."`**
    
4. **"killer whale (orca)" (noun)** --
    
    **`"for. ki-ler ueil" (noun)`**
    
    -- a very large black and white dolphin **that hunts in packs and feeds on large fish and seals (que caza en manadas y se alimenta de grandes peces y focas)**.
    
    - `- **a ve-ri larj blak and uait dol-fin dat jonts in paks and fids on larj fish and silz.**`
    
    Sentence: "Most killer whales are friendly to human beings."
    
    **`Sen-tens: "Most ki-ler ueils ar fren-dli tu jiu-man bi-ings."`**
    
5. **"porpoise (marsopa)" (noun)** --
    
    **`"faiv. por-pis" (noun)`**
    
    -- a small, friendly marine **mammal (mamífero)** related to the whale, with a **blunt snout and a torpedo-shaped body (hocico romo y cuerpo en forma de torpedo)** about two meters long.
    
    - `- **a smal, fren-dli ma-rin ma-mal ri-lei-ted tu de ueil, uit a blont snaut and a tor-pi-do-sheipt bo-di a-baut tu mi-ters long.**`
    
    Sentence: "Porpoises are found in seas, gulfs, and oceans **throughout (a lo largo, en)** the world."
    
    **`Sen-tens: "Por-pis-es ar faun-d in si-z, golfs, and ou-shonz tru-aut de uorld."`**
    
6. **"relationship (relación)" (noun)** --
    
    **`"siks. ri-lei-shun-ship" (noun)`**
    
    -- an emotional connection between two or more persons; an association; a **kinship (parentesco)**.
    
    - `- **an i-mo-sho-nal con-ek-shon bit-uin tu or mor per-sons; an as-so-si-ey-shon; a kin-ship.**`
    
    Sentence: "Adam and Eve **entered into (entraron)** an honorable relationship that **was so strong (era tan fuerte)** and so satisfying that **they became as one (se convirtieron en uno)**."
    
    **`Sen-tens: "Adam and Iv en-terd into an on-o-ra-bl ri-lei-shun-ship dat uaz so strong and so sa-tis-fai-ing dat dei bi-keim az uan."`**
    
7. **"vowel" (noun)** --
    
    **`"se-ven. vául" (noun)`**
    
    -- "a," "e," "i," "o," or "u."
    
    - `- **"ei," "i," "ai," "ou," or "iu."**`
    
    Sentence: "A vowel is a sound made when air passes **freely through (libremente a través de)** the **voice box (laringe)** and the mouth."
    
    **`Sen-tens: "A vául iz a saund meyd uen er pa-siz fri-li tru de vois boks and de maut."`**
    

OTHER WORDS TO LEARN
`(ou-ther wurdz tu lern)`

1. ("uan") "to communicate" (infinitive) [verb preceded by "to"]
`("uan. tu. ko-myu-ni-keit" (in-fin-i-tiv) [verb pre-seedid bai "tu"])`
-- **to exchange (intercambiar)** or **pass along thoughts (transmitir pensamientos)**; **to give (dar)** and receive knowledge.
`-- tu ex-cheinjd or pas a-long thots; tu giv and ri-siv nol-ej.`
    
    Sentence: "**Unlike (A diferencia de los)** animals, human beings are **able (capaz)** to communicate with God and **to enjoy (disfrutar)** a **close relationship (estrecha relación)** with him."
    **`Sen-tens:**(An-laink an-i-mals, hiumn biings ar ei-bol tu ko-myu-ni-keit with God and tu in-yoi a kloos ri-lei-shon-ship with him.)`
    
2. ("tu") "cultivate" (verb)
`("tu. kul-ti-veit" (verb))`
-- **to grow (hacer crecer)**; **to tend (cuidar)**.
`-- tu gro; tu tend.`
    
    Sentence: "Adam cultivated the garden of Eden and **gathered (recogió)** its fruits."
    **`Sen-tens:**(A-dam kul-ti-veit de gard-en ov I-din and ga-dhed its fruts.)`
    
3. ("thrí") "intelligent" (adjective)
`("thrí. in-te-li-jen" (ad-jek-tiv))`
-- having intelligence; having the capacity to think, learn, and understand.
`-- having in-te-li-jens; having de ka-pa-si-ti tu think, lern, and an-der-stand.`
    
    Sentence: "Human beings are generally more intelligent than animals."
    **`Sen-tens:**(Hiumn biings ar jen-er-a-li mor in-te-li-jen den an-i-mals.)`
    
4. ("fór") "irregular" (adjective)
`("fór. i-re-gyu-lar" (ad-jek-tiv))`
-- not conforming to the rules or to the usual pattern.
`-- not kon-forming tu de rulz or tu de yu-zhu-al pat-tern.`
    
    Sentence: "Irregular nouns are nouns that do not follow the rules when changing from singular to plural."
    **`Sen-tens:**(I-re-gyu-lar nouns ar nouns dat do not fol-lo de rulz when chayn-jing from sing-yoo-ler tu ploo-ral.)`
    
5. ("faiv") "**responsible (responsable)**" (adjective)
`("faiv. ri-spon-si-bol" (ad-jek-tiv))`
-- **answerable; accountable; expected to give an account (responsable; que debe rendir cuentas)**.
`-- an-swer-a-bol; a-kaun-ta-bol; ex-pek-tid tu giv an a-kaunt.`
    
    Sentence: "God has made us responsible for **ruling over (gobernar sobre)** the animals of the earth."
    **`Sen-tens:**(God haz maid us ri-spon-si-bol for ru-ling ov-er de an-i-mals ov de erth.)`
    

SINGULAR AND PLURAL NOUNS
`(sing-yoo-ler and ploo-ral nouns)`

Look around you.
`(luk a-round yiu.)`

Describe what you see.
`(di-skraib what yiu si.)`

Are there two or more of the same item?
`(ar dehr tu or mor ov de seim ai-tum?)`

**If so (Si es así)**, you will have to use plural nouns to describe them.
`(if so, yiu wil hav tu yus ploo-ral nouns tu di-skraib dem.)`

Examples: books, lamps, desks, chairs, pencils, pens, boxes, pictures, clocks, **waste baskets (papeleras)**.
`(eg-zam-pulz: books, lamz, desks, chairs, pen-sils, pens, boxes, pik-churs, clocks, waste bas-kets.)`

Sentence: "There are three chairs and one desk in my office."
`(sen-tens: "Dehr ar thrí chairs and uan desk in my of-fis.")`

A singular noun is a noun that names only one person, place, or thing.
`(a sing-yoo-ler noun iz a noun dat neimz on-lee uan per-son, pleis, or thing.)`

A plural noun is a noun that names more than one person, place, or thing.
`(a ploo-ral noun iz a noun dat neimz mor than uan per-son, pleis, or thing.)`

Singular Nouns     Plural Nouns
`(sing-yoo-ler nouns)   (ploo-ral nouns)`

woman    women
`(wu-man)    (wu-men)`

tree     trees
`(trii)     (triiz)`

truth    truths
`(truuth)   (truuths)`

**fear     fears (miedo, miedos)**
`(fir)      (firs)`

party    parties
`(par-tee)  (par-teez)`

How do you make a noun plural?
`(hao du yiu meik a noun ploo-ral?)`

Most nouns can be made plural by simply adding "s."
`(most nouns kan bi meikd ploo-ral bai sim-pli ad-ding "es".)`

Examples: bird--birds; flower--flowers; tree--trees.
`(eg-zam-pulz: bird--birds; flau-er--flau-ers; tri--triiz.)`

However, nouns that end with "s," "sh," "ch," "x," or "z" are made plural by adding "es."
`(ha-ev-er, nouns dat end with "es," "esh," "ch," "eks," or "ze" ar meikd ploo-ral bai ad-ding "es".)`

Examples: glass--glasses; **wish--wishes (deseo, deseos)**; church--churches; fox--foxes.
`(eg-zam-pulz: glass--glass-iz; wish--wish-iz; church--church-iz; fox--fox-iz.)`

Sentence: "The foxes have **holes (madrigueras)** to live in, and the birds have **nests (nidos)** to live in, **but the Son of Man has no place where he can rest his head (pero el hijo del hombre no tiene donde reclinar la cabeza)**" (Luke 9:58).
`(sen-tens: "De fox-iz hav holz tu liv in, and de birdz hav nests tu liv in, but de Son ov Man haz no pleis where hi kan rest his hed" (Luke 9:58).)`

Also, nouns that end with an "o" preceded by a consonant are made plural by adding "es."
`(ol-so, nouns dat end with an "o" pre-seedid bai a kon-suh-nunt ar meikd ploo-ral bai ad-ding "es".)`

Examples: mosquito--mosquitoes; potato--potatoes; hero--heroes.
`(eg-zam-pulz: mos-kee-to--mos-kee-toes; po-tay-to--po-tay-toes; he-ro--he-roes.)`

Sentence: "Idaho is famous for its potatoes."
`(sen-tens: "Ida-ho iz fay-mous for its po-tay-toes.")`

Nouns that end with a consonant followed by a "y" are made plural by changing the "y" to "i" and adding "es."
`(nouns dat end with a kon-suh-nunt fol-ohd bai a "y" ar meikd ploo-ral bai chayn-jing de "y" tu "i" and ad-ding "es".)`

Examples: library--libraries; secretary--secretaries; baby--babies; city--cities.
`(eg-zam-pulz: lie-brer-ee--lie-brer-eez; sek-re-tair-ee--sek-re-tair-eez; bay-bee--bay-beez; sit-ee--sit-eez.)`

Sentence: "Most cities have **several (varias)** good libraries."
`(sen-tens: "Most sit-eez hav sev-er-al gud lie-brer-eez.")`

However, when a noun ends with a vowel followed by a "y," it is made plural by simply adding "s."
`(ha-ev-er, when a noun endz with a vou-el fol-ohd bai a "y," it iz meikd ploo-ral bai sim-pli ad-ding "es".)`  

Examples: journey--journeys; key--keys; toy--toys.
`(eg-zam-pulz: jur-nee--jur-neez; kee--keez; toi--toyz.)`

Sentence: "He has nine keys in his **pocket**. **(bolsillo)**"
`(sen-tens: "Hi haz nain keez in his pok-it.")`

**Most (La mayoría)** nouns that end with "f" or "fe" are made plural by changing the ending to "ves."
`(most nouns dat end with "f" or "fe" ar meikd ploo-ral bai chayn-jing de end-ing tu "ves".)`

Example: knife--knives; **leaf--leaves (hoja, hojas)**; wife--wives.
`(eg-zam-pul: knife--nives; leef--leevz; wife--waivz.)`

Sentence: "She has twenty-three knives in her kitchen."
`(sen-tens: "Shi haz twen-tee-three nives in her kich-en.")`

Singular Nouns      Plural Nouns
`(sing-yoo-ler nouns    ploo-ral nouns)`

bird                birds
`(bird               birdz)`

fox                 foxes
`(fox                fox-iz)`

hero                heroes
`(he-ro              he-roes)`

baby                babies
`(bay-bee            bay-beez)`

toy                 toys
`(toi                toyz)`

wife                wives
`(waif               waivz)`

IRREGULAR NOUN FORMS
`(ir-reh-gyu-lar noun forms)`

Some nouns are **spelled (escriben)** the same, **whether (si)** they are singular or plural.
`(sum nouns ar speld de seim, weth-er dey ar sing-yoo-ler or ploo-ral.)`

Singular Nouns       Plural Nouns
`(sing-yoo-ler nouns    ploo-ral nouns)`

antelope             antelope
`(an-tuh-lohp)         (an-tuh-lohp)`

**deer                 deer (ciervo, ciervos)**
`(deer)               (deer)`

fish                 fish
`(fish)               (fish)`

**sheep                sheep (oveja, ovejas)**
`(sheep)              (sheep)`

Example: "My brother caught six fish."
`(eg-zam-pul: "My bruh-ther caught siks fish.")`

POSSESSIVE NOUNS
`(pos-es-iv nounz)`

A possessive noun is a noun that indicates **ownership (propiedad)** or relationship.
`(a pos-es-iv noun iz a noun dat in-di-kayts oh-ner-ship or ri-lei-shon.)`

Examples: the boy's bicycle, the girl's doll, the man's strength, the woman's beauty.
`(eg-zam-pulz: de boiz by-si-kul, de gurlz dol, de manz strength, de wuh-muhn byu-ti.)`

**Most (La mayoría)** singular nouns are made possessive by simply adding an apostrophe (') and an "s."
`(most sing-yoo-ler nounz ar meikd pos-es-iv bai sim-pli ad-ding an uh-pos-tro-fee and an "es.")`

Examples: child--child's; teacher--teacher's.
`(eg-zam-pulz: child--child's; tee-cher--tee-cher's.)`
Sentence: "This is the teacher's book."
`(sen-tens: "Dis iz de tee-cher's buk.")`

The apostrophe is a **helpful (útil)** little **tool (herramienta)**. It is used
`(de uh-pos-tro-fee iz a help-ful li-tul tul. It iz yusd)`
(a) to show possession and relationship,
`(a: tu shou pos-es-shun and ri-lei-shon,)`
(b) to take the place of a **missing (falta)** letter in a word, and
`(b: tu teik de plais ov a miss-ing le-ter in a word,)`
(c) to form the plural of letters and numbers.
`(c: tu form de ploo-ral ov let-ters and num-bers.)`
Think how much more difficult the English language would be without it.
`(think hao much mor dif-fi-kult de ing-glish lang-gwij wud bi with-out it.)`
**Instead of saying "God's world," we would have to say "the world that belongs to God.                               (En lugar de decir "el mundo de Dios," tendríamos que decir "el mundo que pertenece a Dios.”)"**
`(in-sted ov seiying "God's world," we wud hav tu seiy "de world dat be-longs tu God.")`
Examples: "This is the carpenter's hammer." "The nation's honor must be respected." "That's right." "**It's great to be alive! (¡Es genial estar vivo!)**" "**There are two a's in the word 'altar**. (Hay dos a’s en la palabra 'altar.)'"
`(eg-zam-pulz: "Dis iz de car-pen-ter's ham-er." "De nay-shun's on-er must bi re-spek-tid." "Dat's rait." "It's grayt tu bi uh-laiv!" "Dehr ar tu a's in de word 'al-tar.'")`

Plural nouns that end in "s" or "es" are made possessive by adding an apostrophe (') to the end of the word.
`(ploo-ral nounz dat end in "es" or "es" ar meikd pos-es-iv bai ad-ding an uh-pos-tro-fee tu de end ov de word.)`
Examples: **candles--candles (velas)**'; daughters--daughters'; mothers--mothers'; **ships--ships (barcos)**'; teachers--teachers'.
`(eg-zam-pulz: candles--candlz'; dau-ters--dau-ters'; moth-ers--moth-ers'; ships--ships'; tee-chers--tee-chers'.)`
**Sentence: "Are you going to the Mothers' and Daughters' dinner? Frase: "¿Vas a la cena de Madres e Hijas?**”"
`(sen-tens: "Ar yiu going tu de Moth-ers' and Dau-ters' din-er?")`

Plural nouns that do not end with "s" are made possessive by adding an apostrophe (') and an "s" to the end of the word.
`(ploo-ral nounz dat do not end with "es" ar meikd pos-es-iv bai ad-ding an uh-pos-tro-fee and an "es" tu de end ov de word.)`
Examples: children--children's; men--men's; people--people's; women--women's.
`(eg-zam-pulz: chil-druhn--chil-druhn's; men--men's; pee-puhl--pee-puhl's; wu-men--wu-men's.)`
Sentence: "This store specializes in children's clothing."
`(sen-tens: "Dis storr speshi-uh-lizes in chil-druhn's kloh-thing.")`

YOUR ASSIGNMENT
`(your uh-sain-ment)`

Answer the questions in Grammar Lesson 2.
`(an-swer de kwest-chuns in Grammar Lesson Tu.)`
Then, read Reading Assignment 2 and look for nouns.
`(then, reed Reading Uh-sain-ment Too and luk for nounz.)`
Count the nouns and notice how important nouns are to the English language.
`(kaunt de nounz and no-tis hao im-port-ant nounz ar tu de ing-glish lang-gwij.)`
Without nouns, there would be no **substance (sustancia)** or content to our communication.
`(with-out nounz, dehr wud bi no sub-stans or con-tent tu our ko-myu-ni-kay-shun.)`
We would not know who or what was being discussed or where the action was taking place.
`(we wud not noe hoo or what wuz being dis-kussed or wher de ak-shun wuz tay-king place.)`