**THE NOUN (CONTINUED)**
`DE NAUN (CON-TI-NIUD)`

**INTRODUCTION**
`IN-TRO-DAK-SHON`

**As stated in Lessons One and Two,**
`As stei-ted in Le-sons Wan and Tu,`

**a noun is a word that names**
`a naun is a word dat neims`

**a person, place, or thing.**
`a per-son, pleis, or thing.`

**You have learned that there are various kinds of nouns:**
`Yu hav lernd dat der ar ve-ri-os kainds of nauns:`

**common and proper nouns, collective nouns,**
`ko-mon and pro-per nauns, ko-lek-tiv nauns,`

**concrete and abstract nouns, and specific nouns.**
`kon-krit and abs-trakt nauns, and spe-si-fik nauns.`

**In this lesson, we will learn about properties:**
`In dis le-son, wi wil lern a-baut pro-per-tis:`

**1) gender, 2) person, 3) number, and 4) case.**
`wan) yen-der, tu) per-son, thri) nam-ber, and for) keis.`

**NOUNS TO LEARN**
`NAUNS TU LERN`

**1. "boundary" (noun) A border or a limit.**
`wan. "baun-da-ri" (naun) A bor-der or a li-mit.`

**Sentence: "God has put boundaries around Satan."**
`Sen-tens: "God has put baun-da-ris a-raund Sei-tan."`

**2. "case" (noun) A characteristic or form of a word**
`tu. "keis" (naun) A ka-rak-te-ris-tik or form of a word`

**that indicates the relation of that word**
`dat in-di-keits de ri-lei-shon of dat word`

**to other words in the sentence.**
`tu a-der words in de sen-tens.`

**Sentence: "The subject of a sentence**
`Sen-tens: "De sab-yekt of a sen-tens`

**is always in the Nominative Case."**
`is ol-weis in de No-mi-na-tiv Keis."`

**3. "descendant" (noun) An offspring.**
`thri. "di-sen-dant" (naun) An of-spring.`

**Sentence: "Every human being is a descendant**
`Sen-tens: "E-vri hiu-man bi-ing is a di-sen-dant`

**of Adam and Eve."**
`of A-dam and Iv."`

**4. "gender" (noun) A characteristic**
`for. "yen-der" (naun) A ka-rak-te-ris-tik`

**indicating male sex, female sex, or neither sex.**
`in-di-kei-ting meil seks, fi-meil seks, or nai-der seks.`

**For example, the word "stallion" is masculine,**
`For eg-zam-pol, de word "sta-lion" is mas-kiu-lin,`

**and the word "mare" is feminine.**
`and de word "mer" is fe-mi-nin.`

**5. "number" (noun) A characteristic**
`faiv. "nam-ber" (naun) A ka-rak-te-ris-tik`

**showing if a word means one or more.**
`shou-ing if a word mins wan or mor.`

**6. "temptation" (noun) Something that leads to evil.**
`siks. "temp-tei-shon" (naun) Sam-thing dat lids tu i-vil.`

**OTHER WORDS TO LEARN**
`A-DER WORDS TU LERN`

**1. "embarrass" (verb) To make uncomfortable.**
`wan. "em-ba-ras" (verb) Tu meik an-kom-for-ta-bol.`

**2. "fascinating" (adjective) Attractive; spellbinding.**
`tu. "fa-si-nei-ting" (ad-yek-tiv) A-trak-tiv; spel-bain-ding.`

**3. "invisible" (adjective) That cannot be seen.**
`thri. "in-vi-si-bol" (ad-yek-tiv) Dat ka-not bi sin.`

**4. "spiritually" (adverb) About the spirit or soul.**
`for. "spi-ri-chu-a-li" (ad-verb) A-baut de spi-rit or sol.`

**PROPERTIES OF NOUNS**
`PRO-PER-TIS OF NAUNS`

**All nouns have four characteristics**
`Ol nauns hav for ka-rak-te-ris-tiks`

**called "properties": gender, person,**
`kold "pro-per-tis": yen-der, per-son,`

**number, and case.**
`nam-ber, and keis.`

**Let us look at these properties one by one.**
`Let as luk at dis pro-per-tis wan bai wan.`