
# **I. Reading 1.2: What is Man?**

`Ai. Ri-ding Wan Point Tu: Wat is Man?`

**When God finished creating the animals, he said, "Now, we will make man. We will make man a copy of ourselves. Man will be like us." So God made a man. The man was a spiritual being like God. But unlike God, the man had a physical body.**

`Wen God fi-nisht cri-ei-ting de a-ni-mals, hi sed, "Nau, wi wil meik man. Wi wil meik man a co-pi ov aur-selvs. Man wil bi laik as." So God meid a man. De man was a spi-ri-chu-al bi-ing laik God. Bat an-laik God, de man had a fi-si-cal bo-di.`

**God did not create the man by giving a command. Instead, he took some dust from the ground and shaped it into a body that had arms, legs, hands, feet, and a heart. This body had a head with eyes, ears, a nose, a mouth, and a brain. Somehow, God molded red clay into a perfect human body. Then God breathed life into the man's nose, and he became a living being. The man stood up before God, straight and tall. God called the man "Adam," meaning "earth" or "red clay."**

`God did not cri-eit de man bai gi-ving a co-mand. Ins-ted, hi tuk sam dast from de graund and sheipt it in-tu a bo-di dat had arms, legs, hands, fit, and a hart. Dis bo-di had a hed wit ais, irs, a nos, a mauth, and a brein. Sam-hau, God mol-ded red klei in-tu a per-fekt hiu-man bo-di. Den God bridt laif in-tu de mans nos, and hi bi-keim a li-ving bi-ing. De man stud ap bi-for God, streit and tol. God kold de man "A-dam," mi-ning "erth" or "red klei."`

## **The Garden of Eden**

`De Gar-den ov I-den`

**Then the Lord God planted a garden in a place called Eden. The word "Eden" means "Pleasantness." The Garden of Eden stretched hundreds of kilometers in every direction. It had green grass, colorful flowers, shade trees, and every fruit tree that was good for food. A river flowed through the garden and watered the grass, trees, and flowers.**

`Den de Lord God plan-ted a gar-den in a pleis kold I-den. De werd "I-den" mins "Ple-zant-nes." De Gar-den ov I-den strech-t hon-dreds ov ki-lo-mi-ters in e-vri di-rek-shon. It had grin gras, ko-lor-ful flau-ers, sheid tris, and e-vri frut tri dat was gud for fud. A ri-ver floud tru de gar-den and wo-terd de gras, tris, and flau-ers.`

## **Two Special Trees**

`Tu Spe-shial Tris`

**In the middle of the garden, the Lord God put two special trees. One was "the tree of life"; the other was "the tree that gives knowledge about good and evil." No one knows exactly what these trees looked like. We only know they were very beautiful. The Garden of Eden was like heaven on earth. Some people have called it "Paradise." Surely, it was the kind of place where any man could be happy.**

`In de mi-del ov de gar-den, de Lord God put tu spe-shial tris. Wan was "de tri ov laif"; di a-der was "de tri dat givs no-lech a-baut gud and i-vil." No wan nos ek-zakt-li wat dis tris lukt laik. Wi on-li no dei wer ve-ri biu-ti-ful. De Gar-den ov I-den was laik he-ven on erth. Sam pi-pol hav kold it "Pa-ra-dais." Shur-li, it was de kaind ov pleis wer e-ni man kud bi ha-pi.`

**The Lord God gave Adam a job. God put the man in the garden of Eden to work the soil, to take care of the garden, and to gather its fruits.**

`De Lord God geiv A-dam a job. God put de man in de gar-den ov I-den tu werk de soil, tu teik ker ov de gar-den, and tu ga-der its fruts.`

## **A Command and a Warning**

`A Ko-mand and a Wor-ning`

**God said to Adam, "You may eat from any tree in the garden, but you must not eat from the tree that gives knowledge about good and evil. If you eat fruit from that tree, you will die."**

`God sed tu A-dam, "Yu mei it from e-ni tri in de gar-den, bat yu mast not it from de tri dat givs no-lech a-baut gud and i-vil. If yu it frut from dat tri, yu wil dai."`

## **Adam Names the Animals**

`A-dam Neims de A-ni-mals`

**Then, the Lord God gave Adam another job. God brought every animal of the field and every bird of the air to Adam and told Adam to give each one a name. Adam was not afraid of the animals, and they were not afraid of him. Adam must have studied the birds and animals carefully. One by one, they came to him. Adam gave names to all the tame animals, to all the birds of the air, and to all the wild animals in the forest.**

`Den, de Lord God geiv A-dam a-na-der job. God brot e-vri a-ni-mal ov de fild and e-vri berd ov de er tu A-dam and told A-dam tu giv ich wan a neim. A-dam was not a-freid ov de a-ni-mals, and dei wer not a-freid ov him. A-dam mast hav sta-did de berds and a-ni-mals ker-fu-li. Wan bai wan, dei keim tu him. A-dam geiv neims tu ol de teim a-ni-mals, tu ol de berds ov de er, and tu ol de waild a-ni-mals in de fo-rest.`

## **Adam is Lonely**

`A-dam is Lon-li`

**Even though Adam was surrounded by animals and other beautiful things in the garden, he was lonely. No animal in the garden could talk to him. Adam noticed that all the birds and animals had mates. There were male ducks and female ducks, and there were male and female elephants. Every animal had its mate, but Adam had no one to be his companion. He was all alone. He could not find a helper that was right for him.**

`I-ven do A-dam was sa-raun-ded bai a-ni-mals and a-der biu-ti-ful tings in de gar-den, hi was lon-li. No a-ni-mal in de gar-den kud tok tu him. A-dam no-tist dat ol de berds and a-ni-mals had meits. Der wer meil daks and fi-meil daks, and der wer meil and fi-meil e-le-fants. E-vri a-ni-mal had its meit, bat A-dam had no wan tu bi his kom-pa-nion. Hi was ol a-lon. Hi kud not faind a hel-per dat was rait for him.`

## **The First Woman**

`De Ferst Wo-man`

**The Lord God said, "I see that it is not good for the man to be alone. I will make a person like him to help him."**

`De Lord God sed, "Ai si dat it is not gud for de man tu bi a-lon. Ai wil meik a per-son laik him tu help him."`

**So, the Lord God put Adam to sleep and took a rib from his body. Then, he used the rib from the man to make a woman. After Adam awoke, the Lord God brought the woman to him to be his wife.**

`So, de Lord God put A-dam tu slip and tuk a rib from his bo-di. Den, hi yuzd de rib from de man tu meik a wo-man. Af-ter A-dam a-wok, de Lord God brot de wo-man tu him tu bi his waif.`

**When Adam opened his eyes and looked at the woman that God had brought to him, he said, "Finally! A person like me. Her bones are my bones. Her body is from my body. She was taken out of man, so I will name her Woman." The woman was called "Eve," meaning "life." Eve became the mother of every human being on earth who lived after her.**

`Wen A-dam o-pend his ais and lukt at de wo-man dat God had brot tu him, hi sed, "Fai-na-li! A per-son laik mi. Her bons ar mai bons. Her bo-di is from mai bo-di. Shi was tei-ken aut ov man, so ai wil neim her Wo-man." De wo-man was kold "Iv," mi-ning "laif." Iv bi-keim de ma-der ov e-vri hiu-man bi-ing on erth hu livd af-ter her.`

## **The Two Become One**

`De Tu Bi-kam Wan`

**Thus, God made Adam and Eve in his own likeness. God made them as a copy of himself. God made them male and female and gave them a blessing. God said to them, "Have many children. Fill the earth and control it."**

`Das, God meid A-dam and Iv in his on laik-nes. God meid dem as a ko-pi ov him-self. God meid dem meil and fi-meil and geiv dem a ble-sing. God sed tu dem, "Hav me-ni chil-dren. Fil de erth and kon-trol it."`

**That is why a man leaves his father and mother and is joined to his wife. In this way, two people become one. The man and his wife were naked, but they were not ashamed.**

`Dat is wai a man livs his fa-der and ma-der and is joind tu his waif. In dis wei, tu pi-pol bi-kom wan. De man and his waif wer nei-kid, bat dei wer not a-sheimd.`

## **Fellowship with God**

`Fe-lo-ship wit God`

**For a time (no one knows how long), Adam and Eve lived and worked together just as God intended. They took care of the animals, cultivated the garden, and picked the fruits and berries. They also walked and talked with God as good friends talk to each other.**

`For a taim (no wan nos hau long), A-dam and Iv livd and werkt tu-ge-der jast as God in-ten-ded. Dei tuk ker ov de a-ni-mals, kal-ti-vei-ted de gar-den, and pikt de fruts and be-ris. Dei ol-so walkt and talkt wit God as gud frends tok tu ich a-der.`

## **What Is Man?**

`Wat Is Man?`

**The Bible tells us about the beginning of human history and shows us what human beings were meant to be. What have we learned from this lesson about ourselves and other people? What have we discovered about human nature?**

`De Bai-bol tels as a-baut de bi-gi-ning ov hiu-man his-to-ri and shos as wat hiu-man bi-ings wer ment tu bi. Wat hav wi lernd from dis le-son a-baut aur-selvs and a-der pi-pol? Wat hav wi dis-ko-verd a-baut hiu-man nei-cher?`

**1. A human being is more than an animal. We may act like animals, snarling and snapping at one another and living for pleasure, but that is not what we were meant to be. We were created to live in a better way.**

`wan. A hiu-man bi-ing is mor dan an a-ni-mal. Wi mei akt laik a-ni-mals, snar-ling and sna-ping at wan a-na-der and li-ving for ple-sher, bat dat is not wat wi wer ment tu bi. Wi wer kri-ei-ted tu liv in a be-ter wei.`

**It is clear in this story that the human being was God's greatest creation and that God had something special in mind for humans. When God created light, water, space, dry land, plants, and the sun, moon, and stars, he simply gave a command, and they came into being. When he created a human being, however, God became personally involved. With great care, he formed a human body out of the dust of the earth and breathed into the man's nose the breath of life. The man became a living being, a being similar to God. God commanded the human beings to rule over the animals and to take care of them. We should not worship the animals that God created. We should worship only God.**

`It is klir in dis sto-ri dat de hiu-man bi-ing was Godz grei-test kri-ei-shon and dat God had som-ting spe-shial in maind for hiu-mans. Wen God kri-ei-ted lait, wo-ter, speis, drai land, plants, and de san, mun, and stars, hi sim-pli geiv a ko-mand, and dei keim in-tu bi-ing. Wen hi kri-ei-ted a hiu-man bi-ing, hau-e-ver, God bi-keim per-so-na-li in-volvd. Wit greit ker, hi formd a hiu-man bo-di aut ov de dast ov de erth and bridt in-tu de mans nos de breth ov laif. De man bi-keim a li-ving bi-ing, a bi-ing si-mi-lar tu God. God ko-man-ded de hiu-man bi-ings tu rul o-ver de a-ni-mals and tu teik ker ov dem. Wi shud not wer-ship de a-ni-mals dat God kri-ei-ted. Wi shud wer-ship on-li God.`

**2. A human being is like God mentally. We are much less intelligent than God but more intelligent than animals. A human being can learn to speak a language, write letters, keep records, draw pictures, read books, solve mathematical problems, reason, and plan ahead. Human beings have invented the automobile, the airplane, the computer, and rockets that have put people on the moon. The porpoise and killer whale (orca) have large brains and are quite intelligent, but they are not as intelligent as most human beings. They do not capture and tame people. They do not train men and women to jump through hoops and swim for the entertainment of other whales and porpoises. God gave human beings intelligence similar to his own and has made us responsible for ruling over all the animals of the earth.**

`tu. A hiu-man bi-ing is laik God men-ta-li. Wi ar mach les in-te-li-jent dan God bat mor in-te-li-jent dan a-ni-mals. A hiu-man bi-ing kan lern tu spik a lan-gwij, rait le-ters, kip re-kords, dro pik-chers, rid buks, solv ma-the-ma-ti-cal pro-blems, ri-zon, and plan a-hed. Hiu-man bi-ings hav in-ven-ted de o-to-mo-bil, de er-plein, de kom-piu-ter, and ro-kets dat hav put pi-pol on de mun. De por-pois and ki-ler weil **(marsopa y orca)** hav larj breins and ar kwait in-te-li-jent, bat dei ar not as in-te-li-jent as most hiu-man bi-ings. Dei du not kap-cher and teim pi-pol. Dei du not trein men and wi-men tu jamp tru hups and swim for de en-ter-tein-ment ov a-der weils and por-poi-ses. God geiv hiu-man bi-ings in-te-li-jens si-mi-lar tu his on and has meid as res-pon-si-bol for ru-ling o-ver ol de a-ni-mals ov de erth.`

**3. A human being is like God in loving others. God is love, and God has given human beings a loving nature like his own. To be happy, we must love and be loved. Without love, life is not worth living. Adam was unfulfilled in the Garden of Eden until God gave him a mate. Eve was God's answer to Adam's need for companionship. The first couple entered an honorable love relationship that was so strong and so satisfying that they were not like two individuals. They became as one. Love was like a rope that bound Adam and Eve together in perfect unity. It is reasonable to believe that God created human beings in his own likeness because he wanted to love someone and because he wanted someone to love and honor him in return. It makes God sad when we turn away from him and refuse to return his love. People, like God, want to be loved and honored.**

`thri. A hiu-man bi-ing is laik God in la-ving a-ders. God is lov, and God has gi-ven hiu-man bi-ings a la-ving nei-cher laik his on. Tu bi ha-pi, wi mast lov and bi lovd. Wi-daut lov, laif is not werth li-ving. A-dam was an-ful-fild in de Gar-den ov I-den an-til God geiv him a meit. Iv was Godz an-ser tu A-dams nid for kom-pa-nion-ship. De ferst ka-pol en-terd an o-no-ra-bol lov ri-lei-shon-ship dat was so strong and so sa-tis-fai-ing dat dei wer not laik tu in-di-vi-duals. Dei bi-keim as wan. Lov was laik a rop dat baund A-dam and Iv tu-ge-der in per-fekt iu-ni-ti. It is ri-zo-na-bol tu bi-liv dat God kri-ei-ted hiu-man bi-ings in his on laik-nes bi-koz hi wan-ted tu lov som-wan and bi-koz hi wan-ted som-wan tu lov and o-nor him in ri-turn. It meiks God sad wen wi turn a-wei from him and ri-fius tu ri-turn his lov. Pi-pol, laik God, want tu bi lovd and o-nord.`

**4. A human being deserves honor and respect. God has created human beings in his own likeness. Because God is honorable, human beings are also worthy of honor and respect. God loves and values everyone. He loves and values you. He also loves and values others. Therefore, we must not insult, curse, injure, or dishonor any human being. Everyone of every race is worthy of honor and respect.**

`for. A hiu-man bi-ing di-zervs o-nor and res-pekt. God has kri-ei-ted hiu-man bi-ings in his on laik-nes. Bi-koz God is o-no-ra-bol, hiu-man bi-ings ar ol-so wer-di ov o-nor and res-pekt. God lavs and va-lius e-vri-wan. Hi lavs and va-lius iu. Hi ol-so lavs and va-lius a-ders. Der-for, wi mast not in-salt, kers, in-jur, or di-so-nor e-ni hiu-man bi-ing. E-vri-wan ov e-vri reis is wer-di ov o-nor and res-pekt.`

**5. A human being is capable of knowing God. Of all God's creatures, only the human being seeks after the Creator in order to know him. No animal yearns to walk and talk with God or to worship him. Adam and Eve talked with God as naturally as they talked with each other. What animal has ever bowed down before God in prayer or tried to communicate with him? Unlike animals, human beings have the ability to know God and to have a close relationship with him.**

`faiv. A hiu-man bi-ing is kei-pa-bol ov no-ing God. Ov ol Godz kri-chers, on-li de hiu-man bi-ing siks af-ter de Kri-ei-tor in or-der tu no him. No a-ni-mal yerns tu walk and talk wit God or tu wer-ship him. A-dam and Iv tokt wit God as na-chu-ra-li as dei tokt wit ich a-der. Wat a-ni-mal has e-ver baud daun bi-for God in prer or traid tu ko-miu-ni-keit wit him? An-laik a-ni-mals, hiu-man bi-ings hav de a-bi-li-ti tu no God and tu hav a klos ri-lei-shon-ship wit him.`

## **Looking Ahead**

`Lu-king A-hed`

**Our need to know God and to have a close relationship with him is the central message of the Bible. As we continue our study, we will see how the love relationship between God and mankind was broken and how God developed a plan to bring us back to him.**

`Aur nid tu no God and tu hav a klos ri-lei-shon-ship wit him is de sen-tral me-sij ov de Bai-bol. As wi kon-ti-niu aur sta-di, wi wil si hau de lov ri-lei-shon-ship bi-twin God and mein-kaind was bro-ken and hau God di-ve-lopt a plan tu bring as bak tu him.`

**The good news is that even when we fail to be the kind of people we were meant to be, God is eager to forgive us and lift us up again. We are loved. We are valued.**

`De gud nius is dat i-ven wen wi feil tu bi de kaind ov pi-pol wi wer ment tu bi, God is i-ger tu for-giv as and lift as ap a-gen. Wi ar lovd. Wi ar va-liud.`

**Now, answer the questions in this lesson.**

`Nau, an-ser de kwes-chons in dis le-son.`
